Let me come back to useCallback
because it is important to understand this.
UseCallback allows you to save a function
so that you can reuse it.
Now you had to specify this strange dependency array,
and I don't know about you, but initially you might think,
what do I need this for?
My function has always the same logic
across rerender cycles.
Well, keep in mind that in JavaScript
functions are closures,
which means they close over the values
that are available in their environment.
Now, again, if you're not 100% sure about closures,
attached you'll find some resources
that get you started with them
because you need to know closures
to fully grasp how React works.
Let me give you a concrete example.
Let's say we have a second button,
which enables the toggling functionality.
So a button that makes the other button work.
Allow toggling.
For that we need a new state,
allow toggle and set allow toggle.
And initially that's false.
And we have a new function here,
allow toggle handler.
We could again useCallback but for the moment
let submit it, doesn't matter here.
Here I wanna call set allow toggle and set it to true.
So I always set it to true here.
This does not toggle the toggle value
it just enables toggling for the other button.
Because now, and that's the gotcha,
I will not only bind the allow toggle handler here
to the new button.
Instead, I will use the allow toggle state snapshot
in my other function here
to check whether I'm allowed to set show paragraph.
So here I will check if allow toggle is true,
and only if it is set show paragraph will be called.
So the show paragraph state will only be updated
if toggling is allowed.
And now I will also reuse show paragraph here
to replace my hard coded false value.
With that, if the app reloads,
you will see that if I click the toggle paragraph button,
nothing happens.
Now, if I click allow toggling,
now the other button should do something.
And when we click it, we all should see app running.
However, if I click it still nothing happens.
And that's because functions are closures in JavaScript
and because we're not using useCallback correctly right now.
We even got some yellow squiggly lines here
to make us aware of that problem.
At least I got them here.
Now, what is the problem though?
Functions in JavaScript are closures.
That means when a function is defined,
which happens when the app function
runs in this functions case,
when that function here is defined,
JavaScript basically locks in all the variables
that we're using in there.
All the variables that are defined outside of the function
that we are using, I should say.
In this case, the allowed toggle variable,
that is a variable or a constant
coming from the app function and I'm using it
inside of this function.
Therefore JavaScript closes over that constant
and basically stores that constant
for that function definition.
That means the next time this function here,
the toggle paragraph handler, is executed,
this stored variable will be used.
And with that, the value of that variable
at the point of time, it was stored.
This generally is perfect because this allows us to use
variables from outside the function, in the function,
and call that function at any point of time we want,
which is exactly what we want for a function
that we bind to a button.
The problem with that, and with useCallback however is,
that with useCallback we're telling React
to store that function,
and exactly that function somewhere in memory.
Now, when the app function is re-evaluated and reexecuted
because the toggle state changed,
then React will not recreate this function
because we're using useCallback where we told React
that we don't want to recreate it under all circumstances.
So therefore the allow toggle value
React stored for our function,
is still the old allow toggle value
from the first time the app component was executed,
not the most recent one
because JavaScript, as I just explained,
stored allow toggle this constant
when it created that function here.
And that's of course a gotcha here,
that's a problem.
There are cases where we actually want
to recreate a function because values being used
in that function that are coming from outside the function
might have changed.
And here we have such a case.
So here we would want to add allow toggle as a dependency
in our dependency array.
And that tells React that we generally want
to store that function.
But, whenever allow toggle changes
and it has a new value, we want to recreate that function
and store that new recreated function.
And this ensures that we always use
the latest allow toggle value
inside of that stored function.
If allowed toggle does not change however,
then we don't recreate the function.
And with that if I save this, if we go back,
now, if I click Toggle paragraph nothing happens initially.
However, if I now click on allow toggling,
now we'll see that if I now click toggle paragraph,
we do get our paragraph and all expected output.
It's also worth noting of course, that for toggle paragraph,
we see button running, but we only see it once.
And that's actually our second button
where react memo has no effect
because we're not using useCallback
on the allow toggle handler.
We would see it twice if the button for a toggle paragraph
would also be rendered.
But that's not the case because our useCallback here ensures
that we're not rebuilding this function every time
we only did that once when allow toggle changed.
Now, I know these are concepts that can be confusing.
In the end it's not so much React though
it's more Java script
and you have to understand how closures work
and you have to understand
that primitive reference value concept.
If both is clear, it's absolutely clear how react works.
And I hope that this and the last lectures
could help you understand it
and made it clear how useCallback works,
how functions are really executed,
and how React memo works,
and how that works together with useCallback.